Colitis is a generic term referring to inflammation of the colon.
Etiology and Pathophysiology of Colitis in Small Animals
Based on the duration of clinical signs, colitis may be classified as acute or chronic (lasting at least 3 weeks).
Inciting factors may include infectious (bacterial, parasitic, fungal), traumatic, uremic, and allergic causes. Inflammation may be the result of a defect in mucosal immunoregulation. In most cases, inciting factors remain unknown.
Colitis can also be histologically classified based on the predominant cell type invading the intestinal lamina propria, muscularis, or mucosa. Lymphocytic-plasmacytic colitis is more common than eosinophilic or neutrophilic colitis.
Granulomatous colitis (also known as Boxer colitis or histiocytic ulcerative colitis) is a rare, breed-specific inflammatory bowel disease of young Boxers and French Bulldogs. Granulomatous colitis has also been very rarely reported in cats.
Pseudomembranous colitis is inflammation of the colon associated with clostridial infection, specifically with Clostridioides difficile (formerly Clostridium difficile).
A hereditary lymphocytic-plasmacytic immunoproliferative enteropathy has been identified in Basenjis. Small intestinal diarrhea is most common.
A diarrheal syndrome, typically associated with protein loss, has been reported in Norwegian Lundehunds.
Pathogenesis of Colitis
The colon helps to maintain fluid and electrolyte balance and absorb nutrients; it is also the major site of fecal storage until expulsion and provides an environment for the GI microbiota, the population of bacteria and other organisms that live in the GI tract and serve several beneficial functions. In colitis, disruptions to normal colonic function lead to changes in both absorption and motility; clinically, this manifests as large bowel diarrhea.
Inflammation of the colon decreases the amount of water and electrolytes absorbed and changes colonic motility by suppressing normal colonic contractions and by stimulating giant migrating contractions.
After initial mucosal injury, submucosal lymphocytes and macrophages become exposed to luminal antigens and subsequently trigger inflammation. An exaggerated reaction to dietary or bacterial factors within the lumen of the bowel, genetic predisposition, and sequelae of previous infectious or parasitic disease have also been implicated.
Goblet cells are stimulated to secrete excessive quantities of mucus. Absorption of water and electrolytes is impaired, and motility is decreased. Inflammation disrupts intracellular tight junctions and decreases the transmucosal electrical potential difference, interrupting the colon's ability to absorb sodium. Normal segmentation is inhibited; giant migrating muscular contractions proceed down the length of the colon and rapidly expel luminal contents. The inflamed bowel is more sensitive to stretch, and contents entering the colon stimulate strong, migrating muscular contractions, an urge to defecate, and abdominal discomfort.
Acute colitis develops with mucosal infiltration with neutrophils and epithelial disruption and ulceration.
Chronic colitis is most often characterized by mucosal infiltration of plasma cells and lymphocytes, fibrosis, and sometimes ulceration.
Granulomatous colitis is histologically characterized by granulomatous infiltration and bacterial invasion of the colonic wall. A correlation between granulomatous colitis and Escherichia coli invasion within colonic mucosal macrophages has been found on the basis of culture-independent molecular analysis. Adherent and invading E coli replicating within macrophages have been identified. Gross lesions are typified by a segmental, thickened, partially obstructed segment of bowel (ileum and colon most commonly), and/or colonic hemorrhage and ulceration.
C difficile–associated pseudomembranous colitis is characterized by formation of pseudomembranes, which are necrotic mucosal plaques. C difficile can produce several toxins that lead to clinical signs; toxin A and toxin B are the most common in dogs and cats. Pseudomembranous colitis is a very rare condition in dogs and cats.
Epidemiology of Colitis in Small Animals
Colitis is common in both dogs and cats.
Most affected dogs are middle-aged, and there is no sex predilection.
Cats with chronic colitis tend to be middle-aged and are more commonly purebred, and some may have hypereosinophilic syndrome.
Animals with eosinophilic colitis tend to be younger.
With granulomatous colitis, onset of disease is often before affected animals are 4 years old. Boxers and French Bulldogs are predominantly affected.
Pseudomembranous colitis is rare in dogs and cats but is an important disease of horses. Potential risk factors include antimicrobial suppression of normal intestinal microbiota, raw meat diets, and visiting human health care facilities.
Clinical Findings of Colitis in Small Animals
The most common clinical sign of colitis is large bowel diarrhea (characterized by mucus, hematochezia, tenesmus, and occasionally pain when defecating). There is often an increased urgency and frequency of defecation, with decreased fecal volume per bowel movement. Weight loss and vomiting can occur but are uncommon; they occur more often when the small intestine is involved.
Clinical signs may wax and wane. Initially, clinical signs may be sporadic, but progression usually occurs.
Physical examination is unremarkable in most cases. A thorough rectal examination may reveal rectal polyps or malignant neoplasms that can mimic clinical signs of colitis.
Clinically, granulomatous colitis is typically characterized by chronic large bowel diarrhea that is refractory to treatment. Weight loss may also be noted.
Clinical signs of pseudomembranous colitis include large bowel diarrhea, vomiting, anorexia, lethargy, dehydration, tenesmus, and weakness. In severe cases, acute hemorrhagic diarrhea, hypovolemic shock, and death are possible.
Diagnosis of Colitis in Small Animals
Rule out infectious causes
Dietary trial
Endoscopy
The initial approach to diagnosing colitis should include a thorough history and physical examination, including rectal palpation and fecal evaluation.
Fecal smears to look for Giardia and fungal elements (Histoplasma capsulatum, Pythium insidiosum), fecal flotation for parasite identification (Trichuris vulpis in dogs), and testing for Tritrichomonas foetus in cats (eg, via PCR assay) are advised.
Rectal cytological examination can be used to investigate other causes of large bowel diarrhea, particularly in patients with a history of travel to areas with a high prevalence of histoplasmosis. Cytology can reveal inflammatory cells, neoplastic cells, and certain infectious agents (eg, H capsulatum).
A dietary trial (with an easily digestible, high-fiber, or hypoallergenic diet for a minimum of at least 2 weeks exclusively) is recommended next for stable patients before more advanced diagnostics are pursued.
If clinical signs persist, a CBC, biochemical profile, and urinalysis should be performed to exclude other diseases; in most cases of chronic colitis, results are normal. Peripheral eosinophilia is invariably present in small animals with eosinophilic colitis, although it can also be present with parasitic disease.
For cats, feline leukemia virus/feline immunodeficiency virus testing is also recommended, as well as testing thyroid level if it is age-appropriate.
In dogs, testing for hypoadrenocorticism should be considered.
Routine abdominal radiographs are also usually normal. Contrast radiographs can occasionally demonstrate intraluminal narrowing, which could indicate an infiltrative disease process.
Ultrasonography allows the visualization of colonic mucosa, localized lesions, and the size and echogenicity of lymph nodes.
Colonoscopy is indicated to visually inspect the mucosal surface of the colon and to obtain biopsy specimens.
Preparing the colon for colonoscopy is essential to avoid missing small or subtle lesions because of residual fecal material on the mucosal surface. Food should be withheld for 24 hours before the procedure, followed by a combination of enemas and an oral colonic lavage solution. Several agents can be used to clean the bowel, such as polyethylene glycol 3350, sodium picosulfate, and bisacodyl.
Multiple samples from the ascending, transverse, and descending colon should be obtained, regardless of gross morphological appearance. Because of poor correlation between gross appearance and histological results, results should be interpreted in light of physical examination findings and history.
Because of the histological characteristics of granulomatous colitis, excluding inflammation secondary to fungal disease, intestinal parasites, feline infectious peritonitis, and foreign material is important. Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) is a newer and more sensitive method to identify bacteria in tissue and can be used on formalin-fixed tissue. Analyzing colonic biopsies with FISH is highly recommended in Boxers and French Bulldogs.
Treatment and Control of Colitis in Small Animals
Treatment of any infectious causes
Dietary change
Antimicrobial therapy (if indicated)
Potentially anti-inflammatory/immunosuppressive therapy in patients with inflammatory bowel disease
Modulation of the microbiome (probiotics, prebiotics, fecal microbiota transplantation)
Pearls & Pitfalls
If possible, the inciting cause of colitis should be identified and eliminated.
Because shedding of ova by whipworms is intermittent, therapeutic deworming (eg, fenbendazole 50 mg/kg, every 24 hours for 3 days, repeated in 3 weeks and again in 3 months if there is a positive response) should be done even if results of fecal examinations are negative.
Dietary Therapy in Colitis
Supplementing the diet with fiber (1–6 teaspoons of psyllium hydrophilic mucilloid or 1–4 tablespoons of coarse wheat bran/feeding), or feeding a commercial high fiber diet, improves diarrhea in many animals with colitis.
Dietary fiber decreases free fecal water, prolongs luminal transit time (increasing the opportunity to absorb water), absorbs toxins, increases fecal bulk and stretches the colonic smooth muscle, and improves contractility. Over time, the fiber dose can be decreased or eliminated, and a standard food can be substituted without causing the diarrhea to return.
Novel protein diets have effectively controlled clinical signs of colitis in both dogs and cats. The protein source used should be one to which the animal has not previously been exposed. Alternatively, a hydrolyzed diet may be used. These specialized diets disrupt the protein structure sufficiently to remove any allergens and allergenic epitopes, thereby preventing immune recognition.
If feeding a high-fiber or hypoallergenic (novel protein or hydrolyzed protein) diet is not beneficial, a commercial low-residue diet may be tried, especially one that contains fructooligosaccharides (FOSs).
FOSs enhance the colonic microbiota and assist in preventing and treating colonic disease. These complex carbohydrates are not digested in the small intestine. They are fermented by specific colonic bacteria that use them as an energy source. FOSs promote growth of beneficial bacteria and inhibit growth of potentially harmful bacteria. They are responsible for the production of short-chain fatty acids.
Short-chain fatty acids (acetate, propionate, butyrate) are an important energy source essential for maintenance of normal mucosal health. They help maintain intestinal motility and ameliorate intestinal inflammation. Alteration of fatty acids leads to mucosal atrophy and injury.
Cats (like dogs) with lymphocytic-plasmacytic colitis may respond to dietary management alone (eg, novel protein or commercially available hydrolyzed protein diet). In one study, cats were initially treated with dietary fiber or with dietary fiber and pharmacological intervention (prednisolone, tylosin, or sulfasalazine). Most cats were eventually maintained on high-fiber diets or a highly digestible diet (1).
Antimicrobial Therapy in Colitis
Metronidazole (10–15 mg/kg, PO, every 12 hours, long-term) is often used for chronic colitis in cats. Its therapeutic effects include antiprotozoal and antimicrobial activity and inhibition of some aspects of cell-mediated immunity. It is not usually used as a sole agent but rather in combination with either dietary management or another drug. Although metronidazole is well tolerated in both dogs and cats, adverse effects can occur (mostly neurological; eg, nystagmus, ataxia, vestibular signs, seizures), either with chronic therapy or at high dosages. However, neurotoxicoses should be reversible within 5–7 days after treatment is discontinued.
Tylosin (10–15 mg/kg, PO, every 8–12 hours, for 4–6 weeks, then tapered to the lowest effective dosage), a macrolide antimicrobial used primarily in food animals, is useful in chronic enteropathies because it interferes with bacterial adhesion to the mucosa and has some antimicrobial and immunomodulating effects and minimal adverse effects. It targets mainly facultative and obligate anaerobic gram-positive bacteria and some gram-negative bacteria. However, E coli and Salmonella are resistant to tylosin.
Current treatment recommendations for granulomatous colitis require antimicrobials that are effective against E coli and that penetrate intracellularly, such as enrofloxacin (dogs only: 5–20 mg/kg, PO, every 24 hours), with reassessment every 2 weeks and total treatment duration of 8 weeks. Due to increasing reports of resistance to enrofloxacin in patients with granulomatous colitis, culture and susceptibility testing is recommended to ensure appropriate antimicrobial treatment.
Cats are susceptible to retinal damage and blindness when exposed to enrofloxacin (especially at higher dosages) due to a genetic polymorphism in the feline ABCG2 ocular blood barrier. Therefore, this drug should avoided in cats wherever possible.
The use of antimicrobials in patients with chronic diarrhea is debatable and should be avoided where possible (with the exception of granulomatous colitis) due to often short-lived responses coupled with concerns about lasting dysbiosis and development of resistance. Alternative ways to manipulate the microbiota (including through probiotics, prebiotics, and/or fecal microbiota transplantation) could be considered instead.
Modulation of the Microbiome in Colitis
Fecal microbiota transplantation has been used to treat dogs and cats with chronic colitis, usually in conjunction with standard treatment, although it has been a sole treatment in some patients. Specific protocols for donor screening and administration can be found in For More Information. Methods for fecal microbiota transplantation include oral administration, endoscopic channel delivery, and retention enema, with retention enema typically being the most commonly used approach due to ease of administration. Further studies are warranted on the use of fecal transplantation in dogs and cats with chronic colitis.
Similarly, probiotics have been used in dogs and cats with diarrhea and are usually well tolerated. Evidence of their beneficial effect is mostly anecdotal. Further studies are warranted.
Anti-Inflammatory/Immunosuppressive Therapy in Colitis
Anti-inflammatory medications may also be used in chronic colitis patients in which dietary change and deworming have been unsuccessful, especially if histological evidence of inflammation is present. Sulfasalazine (dogs), prednisone or prednisolone, and azathioprine (dogs) are used most commonly.
Sulfasalazine (15–30 mg/kg [maximum 3 g], PO, every 8–12 hours; then taper by 50% or to lowest effective dose when response occurs) can be used to treat lymphocytic-plasmacytic colitis in dogs. Long-term use is discouraged because it predisposes patients to keratoconjunctivitis sicca.
Sulfasalazine is a prostaglandin synthetase inhibitor and has antileukotriene activity. It consists of mesalamine linked to sulfapyridine in an azochemical bond; this linkage prevents absorption in the upper GI tract and allows most of the drug to be transported to the large intestine. Once sulfasalazine has reached the large intestine, it is metabolized by cecal and colonic bacteria, releasing both components.
Mesalamine acts locally to decrease colonic mucosal inflammation.
The sulfonamide component of sulfasalazine, sulfapyridine, is believed to be systemically absorbed and therefore does not have any local therapeutic effect in colitis but is blamed for the adverse effects of sulfasalazine.
Salicylates are metabolized in the liver by hepatic enzymatic processes involving glucuronyl transferase. Because cats are deficient in this enzymatic pathway, salicylates have prolonged half-lives in this species. Therefore, sulfasalazine is not recommended for colitis in cats.
Glucocorticoids (typically prednisolone), in combination with dietary management with or without modulation of the microbiome, are the treatment of choice for chronic colitis due to inflammatory bowel disease in cats.
Glucocorticoids may be introduced into the therapeutic plan for dogs when other therapies are not successful or if the 5-aminosalicylates result in adverse effects. For dogs, prednisone (2 mg/kg, PO, every 24 hours, for 2 weeks; after resolution of clinical signs, decrease dosage by 25% every 2–4 weeks) can usually maintain remission.
Cats usually tolerate glucocorticoids very well; however, adverse effects are common in dogs and include polyuria, polydipsia, polyphagia, GI bleeding, increased susceptibility to infection, iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism, and pituitary-adrenocortical suppression.
Budesonide is a nonhalogenated glucocorticoid used in treatment of Crohn disease in humans. Budesonide undergoes extensive first-pass metabolism in the liver; theoretically, this should decrease the adverse effects that often occur with other glucocorticoids because little of the active drug is systemically available. In one study of 10 healthy dogs, the pituitary-adrenocortical axis was suppressed; however, no other adverse effects were observed. In some patients, systemic effects may still be appreciated.
Immunosuppressive drugs are mostly used in combination with glucocorticoids when the response is not satisfactory with the latter alone. The most commonly used are azathioprine (dogs only) and chlorambucil (cats).
Azathioprine (2–2.5 mg/kg, PO, every 24–48 hours; then tapered to lowest effective dose), alone or in combination with prednisone/prednisolone, has been used to control clinical signs associated with lymphocytic-plasmacytic colitis in dogs. Azathioprine may be considered in dogs that are poorly responsive to prednisone/prednisolone alone or with sulfasalazine.
The serious adverse effects of azathioprine in cats (myelosuppression and hepatotoxicity) preclude its use in feline colitis.
Chlorambucil (0.1–0.2 mg/kg or 2 mg/cat, PO, every 48–72 hours for 4–8 weeks or until clinical signs are markedly improved) is used in cats in combination with prednisolone if needed.
Cyclosporine (5 mg/kg, PO, every 24 hours, long-term) has been effective in steroid-refractory cases of colitis in dogs; however, it has not been evaluated in cats with chronic colitis. Adverse effects include GI disturbances, gingival disease, and alopecia.
Some animals also require short-term use of motility modifiers until inflammation is controlled. Loperamide (0.1–0.2 mg/kg, every 6–12 hours) stimulates segmental activity and slows passage of fecal contents. It also decreases colonic secretion, enhances salt and water absorption, and increases anal sphincter tone. Loperamide should not be used in dogs with the ABCB1-delta genetic polymorphism, and it is contraindicated in cases of infectious colitis (eg, caused by Salmonella, Campylobacter, or Clostridium).
Prognosis of Colitis in Small Animals
The short-term prognosis for chronic colitis is good for both dogs and cats. However, the long-term prognosis for complete resolution without relapses appears poor. Most cases of inflammatory bowel disease are not curable, and some form of treatment will likely be necessary long-term. For some animals, especially cats, long-term management of chronic colitis may be possible with diet alone.
Most cases of idiopathic lymphocytic-plasmacytic colitis respond to appropriate dietary and medical changes. Stricture formation and extensive fibrosis warrant a more guarded prognosis.
Eosinophilic colitis in dogs responds favorably to controlled diets and glucocorticoid therapy. In cats, the prognosis is more guarded, and more aggressive treatment with immunosuppressive agents is required.
Granulomatous colitis carries a poor prognosis unless appropriate treatment is instituted.
The immunoproliferative enteropathy of Basenjis also carries a poor prognosis; most dogs die within 2 years after diagnosis, although some have been reported to live up to 5 years.
Similarly, the prognosis for the diarrheal syndrome reported in Norwegian Lundehunds is also poor.
Key Points
Colitis is common in dogs and cats and typically presents as chronic diarrhea of unknown origin or as acute large bowel diarrhea in the acute form.
Once infectious causes have been ruled out, diet change is the recommended treatment.
Animals that do not respond to diet change may require anti-inflammatory drugs.
Newer treatments such as fecal microbial transplantation are being explored as part of the treatment for colitis.
For More Information
Chaitman J, Gaschen F. Fecal microbiota transplantation in dogs. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract. 2021;51(1):219-233.
Washabau RJ, Day MJ, Willard MD, et al. Endoscopic, biopsy, and histopathologic guidelines for the evaluation of gastrointestinal inflammation in companion animals. J Vet Intern Med. 2010;24(1):10-26.
Also see pet owner content regarding colitis in dogs and cats.
References
Dennis JS, Kruger JM, Mullaney TP. Lymphocytic/plasmacytic colitis in cats: 14 cases (1985-1990). J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1993;202(2):313-318.