Each veterinary visit should include screening questions to determine whether there are any behavior concerns or any change in behavior from previous visits. In addition to enabling the veterinarian to assess the pet's health and welfare, these screening questions initiate a dialogue with clients about behavior and let them know that attention to behavior is central to good veterinary care. Recording responses to behavior questions at each visit establishes a baseline for future comparison.
A basic behavior screening questionnaire is a simple way to collect information. Questionnaires should be standardized so no topic is left uncovered and data can be compared from visit to visit. When used continually from the pet’s first visit, these tools allow for early detection and intervention.
Addressing behavior concerns early provides the best chance to manage problems and prevent a minor issue from becoming more serious and deeply entrenched.
If abnormal behavioral signs (eg, barking, growling, lunging, house soiling) are identified during the visit, the veterinarian needs to determine whether there are underlying medical issues, whether the behaviors in context are normal or abnormal, and whether they are manageable for the household. By assessing the behavior in this way, the veterinarian can either begin offering behavior guidance or, when indicated, refer the client to a veterinary behavior specialist for further counseling.
Behavior services should be offered using an integrated team approach. Staff can help with behavior screening (questionnaires) and provide pet selection advice and preventive guidance for new pet owners. Veterinarians or staff with sufficient skills and training can educate clients about how to prevent and manage undesirable behaviors and can offer classes to help pet owners socialize and train pets. They can supplement their advice with a good set of resource materials and links to websites that provide appropriate and sound behavior guidance.
Veterinary behavioral technicians can oversee the preventive counseling and training services offered by a veterinary hospital. They can also play an integral role during behavior consultations by taking the history, demonstrating behavior modification techniques and products, and conducting case follow-up and ongoing support. Information sources for veterinarians, technicians, and staff interested in veterinary behavior are listed in Resources for Veterinary Practices.
Veterinarians and Animal Trainers in Behavioral Medicine
Veterinarians also have a vested interest in how clients train their pets. Trainers should have a sound background on species-typical behaviors, as well as on how behaviors can be shaped and modified through the principles of learning that apply to all species. Referral to an individual who uses outdated or inhumane methods to modify behavior does not meet accepted standards of care and poses a risks of irreversible adverse effects to both patients and owners.
Veterinarians should observe and talk even with certified trainers to ensure that their methodologies are humane, effective, and appropriate for individual owners and pets. Having an active discussion about training with each pet owner can help that owner understand how behaviors are learned and how to differentiate trainers who use undesirable techniques from those who use humane, reward-based techniques.
Resources for Veterinary Practices in Behavioral Medicine
Behavior associations
Behavior certification groups
European College of Animal Welfare and Behavioural Medicine (ECAWBM)
Australian and New Zealand College of Veterinary Scientists (ANZCVS). Veterinary Behaviour Chapter
Guidelines for appropriate and humane training and behavior modification
Trainers